Oh, I was so tired--so weary. I could hear my jaw crack at the
corners where the strings are, each time I yawned. And not without
reason. For I was nearly eighteen and had been two years in the
nunnery of the holy St. Brigida of Cheverney.

Lord, Lord! how I hated it--I, Margaret Douglas, who had been the
petted of great men and strong men ever since I could remember--ay,
and before! I, who had known Maud Lindsay (called the “Snarer of
Hearts”) in her best time, who had sworn, when no more than thirteen,
that I would outdo her--to end thus, to be despatched like a bale of
goods at sixteen years of age out of Scotland! (Well, _that_ I would
not have minded so greatly. ’Tis a dull sour place, wet above and
boggy below, with much damp mist between!)

But what irked me was that I, who before I could walk had been called
the Fair Maid of Galloway, should be let grow fusty and frowsy as the
Sister of Mercy who goes from door to door, begging for the poor--all
because I had a cousin who wanted to marry me and so keep Galloway and
the Highland estates in the family coffer--bah!

Well, at any rate, I had just to bear it. _Tinkle-tankle!_ Oh yes,
there went the weary bells, like cracked tin mugs which the gipsy-folk
peddle out of their asses’ saddlebags along with coarse cloth for
“jupes,” or sleeved waistcoats, and at the bottom red earth for
marking sheep withal!

At six o’clock in the morning, black roaring winter or gracious
June--out you must turn in this our Convent of the Birch--ay, though
you be thrice a princess in your own right. And they would not let you
have so much as a drop of warm water in a pottery jar for the foot of
your bed (mightily comforting it is to lone women!), nor even suffer
you to sleep in your woollen _gonelle_, which is to say gown, that
hath a hood to it, and, being turned head-and-heels, makes an
admirable nest for cold great-toes a-nights. I have suffered from cold
feet all my days. Indeed, if I had not, perhaps I had been a happier
woman.[1]

Then _tinkle-tankle_ all over again and prayers and reading of the
Scripture at nine. Never a bite or a sup till half-past ten, when,
while you feed in silence, they read to you out of the _Lives of the
Saints_--about how Sister Brigida, afterwards martyred, established
this holy order of nuns and died in the hope of a better life. The
which I judged to be an _espérance_ noways over-sanguine! For the
Good God knows she would have had to travel fast and far, that same
holy Bridget, to find a worse life than that rule conventual she
established, and which, for my sins, had been transported from the
savage land of Ireland (where it belonged) to the sweet and smiling
Touraine that lay outside these weary walls. But since you cannot see
a smile even thirty miles broad through walls four feet thick, I might
just as well have been on the Bog of Allen.

So it went on. _Tinkle-tank_ of bells--whirr of doves’ wings (we had
them three times a week to evening refection--the wings oftener than
the doves, so far as I was concerned). _Coo-roo-coo-roo!_ From high up
in the bell-tower the sound came. Then the buzz of flies and wasps and
angry red-bottomed bees trying to find their way through the painted
window-panes. Yes, oh yes, it was peaceful, and hungrysome and
chastening, and made me wish to be a crow or a sparrow or a midge--I
was not at all particular--at any rate something that could fly away
into the blue beyond the confinement of these sorrowful walls, within
which the Lady Superior for ever snored in her cell and Sister Eulalie
yattered eternally at one’s tail, snivelling out threats of punishment
if you climbed a tree or so much as took a garden ladder to look over
the wall. Not that there was much to see, when you did look over--only
the wide spread of the forest and the green fields--not in patches, as
in Scotland, with heather and whin-bloom everywhere, but all in
cultivated squares, like a painted chess-board. There were poor men,
also, with legs blackened in the sun, half-naked or even with no more
than a clout about them, that ran at a look, or shrieked for the clink
of an iron ring.

Once I threw over the wall to one of these poor wretches my purple
jupe (the colour never became me), which was of warm cloth--also
because the weather, being August, made me to sweat when I wore it.

And for this, as well as for speaking to a man, Sister Eulalie docked
me of all food save bread-and-water for four days. “Yet,” said I,
“Bridget of Kildare, the holy, never had petticoat in her life to
bless herself withal! So where is the harm?”

“You have looked upon a man--a mortal sin!” said she, turning up the
sourish, plum-coloured tip of her nose, which had a drop on it chilly
as winter, even in the summer heats.

“Well, people do not die of it. So did my mother before me!” quoth I,
knowing well all the time that I was not wise, yet being tempted, and
my choler getting the better of me.

“But he looked upon you,” she cried, raising her voice in order to
wake the Superior, “the while you took off”--

“No, no,” I said, willing to appease her if possible before it was too
late, “he was no man really, only a wild savage, black as a Moor of
Barbary. And, besides, I went down the ladder backwards, and let my
jupe fall to the ground betwixt the wall and a gooseberry bush”--

“Silence!” commanded Sister Eulalie, raising her hand, with one finger
pointed to the zenith; “silence, or I will take you indoors forthwith
to Madame the Superior!”

Then, being at the time but a girl, I pouted, and answered back.

“Why, it is nothing,” I said. “Did not the Scripture which was read
from the lectern in the refectory on Wednesday tell of the
never-to-be-sufficiently-reverenced Judith who did more than that?
Yes, much more, or she is sore belied”--

“Take from me, thou wicked one, _six days’ bread-and_”--

But at that very moment the great gate opened, and through it I could
see, with a train of churchmen behind him--shaven, shorn, clad in
white and scarlet and green, with a peaked cap all glittering with
gold upon his head--who but Laurence M‘Kim, my old playmate, who had
helped to save me (though I had forgotten much of the details) from
the terrible Sieur de Retz, at Machecoul. Also, who used to kiss me--I
remember that. Yes, it is true, my memory only shows in patches, but
the patches are mostly bright ones.

Well, who will blame if I broke away from Sister Eulalie, crying
“Larry, Larry!”

Half crying too--or perhaps a little more than half. And so would
anyone--yes, anyone! That is, anyone who had been as long as I in the
convent-prison of St. Brigida of Cheverney.

I flung myself upon him. He was riding a white mule--oh, finer, much
finer than that of the Bishop of Evreaux. And I was so agile from
being fed like a greyhound, and with being so very glad to see him,
that I would have kissed him if I could. Yes, truly, what is the use
of being a princess else! But, as it was, I could only get my arm half
about his waist, before Sister Eulalie was upon me.

He bent down to disengage me gently, murmuring in Scots, “Wait a
little while!” And then he stretched out two fingers over my head and
said in a voice full of the music which first made my uncle take him
to Dulce Cor as a chorister, “_Bless you, my child!_”

As one stricken by palsy, Sister Eulalie fell back, marvelling at the
great ecclesiast and his princely retinue. And (best of all) Larry, my
Larry, gave her his ring to kiss. It was good to see. Also he queried
with his eye if I loved her--if she had been good to me. But I shook
my head and frowned till he understood, and nodded, meaning thereby
that he had come to do some little regulating of accounts.

“I have been to Rome, sister,” he said; “the point of my right shoe
and the four iron shoes of my beast have been blessed by the Holy
Father. If there be sin upon you, bend down and kiss them also.”

And while Sister Eulalie was, for her soul’s good, embracing of the
beast’s near front hoof (and doing it gingerly, too, for the mule had
a spirit of its own), Larry whispered to me, “These behind there do
not matter!” At the same time he waved his hand towards his followers.
They all with one accord turned their heads from us in the direction
of the garden gate.

He then pushed out his foot in the silver stirrup for a mounting step.

“Now!” he whispered.

And in a moment, with the help of his hand, I was up like a bird. And
it is past telling how good it was. For, judge ye, it was two years
since I had been kissed--by a man, that is. And others do not really
count, as I have seen. Well, in a moment I was down again and toying
demurely with my rosary, before the white mule and Sister Eulalie had
agreed about the salutation of the last shoe of blessed iron. Larry
had his people well trained. For nobody laughed. Indeed, what more
natural than that I should embrace one of my own folk after two years.
Yet what the young man’s manners at Rome must have been, to make them
so biddable, it is, as I tell him, better only guessing.

Ah, it was a good world after all--that which God had made; and has a
way of improving suddenly when it is at its black worst.




 CHAPTER II.
 ONE LEG GREEN AND ONE LEG PINK

For, after all, Laurence was a good deal older than I. And that
makes a difference. Besides, he had known me from the time that Maud
Lindsay sent me off to play with him, that she might have the more
time (and the better) in which to torment his brother Sholto with her
wilfulnesses.

That was, of course, before they were married and had five children.
Some time before.

But all of that may be read in the history, that is titled after the
chief of our house, _The Black Douglas_. But that is writ solemnly and
of set purpose; also straight on, as a book should be, while this
which for my pleasure I am writing contains just the things that a
woman has done and thought and heard and seen ever since she was a
girl, and is of little value save to herself and to make the winter
nights pass.

And so Laurence M‘Kim was an abbot, and, indeed, might have been a
bishop had he wished it. But he was not given that way, having enough
knowledge of himself to know that he was not worthy. That he was a
real Lord Abbot I knew. For had not I myself made him so--or, rather,
my cousins William and James, who acted for me, and did not cross me
in aught, save only in sending me to this abominable convent!

But that is always the way with men. They give us a thousand things we
do not want; they refuse us the one thing we do.

I wonder, indeed, how they would have liked it themselves. William
would have spitted the porteress in a week, I know, and broke open the
great spiked door. But James, who was ever ready with his answer, had
in after-times the effrontery to tell me that he would have liked it,
contenting himself always well where women were.

Bah! At any rate, I am not come to that yet. _Then_ I was glad enough
to see Larry. Yes, glad with a great gladness that no man can tell.
And he did not even damp me when he out with a great folded parchment,
all done in purple and black, with the seal of St. Peter hanging to
it, almost as big as the great censer of Trèves which only a six-foot
man can swing.

And then, last of all, there came out the Lady Superior, whom we maids
called the Bald Cat. I mean that I did--I, and two French girls who,
for various kittenishnesses wrought in overstrait homes, had been sent
to the Sign of the Bald Cat to repent themselves of their sins. The
Lady Superior’s other name was Marie Noël de Saint Verrier, and she
had (I remarked it myself, but not overtly to Sister Eulalie) as much
discernment of the good things of life, or the honest, well-meaning
thoughts of men and women, as a sow hath of the perfumes in a flower
garden. She had but one table in her decalogue--that at which she did
continually over-eat herself; but one article in her _credo_--that all
was right which was done within the convent of St. Brigida of
Cheverney, and all wrong that was done outside of it.

Well--there was more done in St. Brigida than was told to Madame Noël
de Saint Verrier--otherwise and more exactly the Bald Cat.

But let it be understood that Laurence, Venerable Prior of the Abbey
of Holy Devorgil, called Dulce Cor by Solway Side, did not in the
least misbecome his errand. Troth, sirs, I wot not! William, my
cousin, now Earl of Douglas, would not have sent him else. He was,
albeit, a young and personable prelate, also well to look upon--a
thing which always had its effect with the Bald Cat--that is, in a
man. In girls she could not abide it. She cut their love-locks to the
bristle with her own hand, and added an extra six inches to their poke
bonnets if their eyes sparkled. But not to mine. For though she had
been bidden to be strict with me in the matter of discipline, yet for
all that, I was still a princess in my own country, and the daughter
of one Duke of Touraine and the sister of another.

But the Bull--the papal Bull!

The Bald Cat took it, fumbling meanwhile for the pieces of Venice
glass set together in an oval frame with water between them, by means
of which it pleased her to think that she could read. But all the
glasses in the world--no, not Agrippa’s ball of crystal itself, could
have taught her to read that Papal Bull. It was in Latin, and so after
turning it this way and that, she gave it back to the Abbot Laurence,
who now stood before her, tall and young and fair to look upon.

“Read it, if you please, your learned reverency!” she said, softly for
her.

But Laurence, with a proud gesture, which amounted almost to contempt,
handed it to the almoner of the convent, Father Pierre Bartentane,
called Gigot from his shape--this, by us ill-behaved girls.

“Let the Lady Abbess hear what says the Holy Father!” he said. “As I
am come to carry off her fairest flower, I wish her to understand that
I do not misconstrue my warrant!”

I leaped towards Larry, and would have hugged him in my arms.

“Am I indeed quit of this for ever and a day?” I cried in our own
Scots, which I knew that none of the others could understand. “Am I to
go away with you? Tell me quick!”

“Ay,” said Laurence, turning away his eyes, “you are to go with me.
But--I am to take you to marry your Cousin William--my Lord Earl of
Douglas.”

“The Man of Iron!” I said.

And I think I made a wry face and shrugged my shoulders--for I was but
young, and knew no better. “I had rather it had been yourself I was to
wed, Larry,” I said. “And that in spite of your clerkery!”

His face reddened till it became almost scarlet. But he did not look
at me as he replied.

“My clerkhood would not stand in my way, God wot--if that were all,”
he answered; “but, my lady, I do not forget that I am but a poor man’s
son, and my princess’s very humble servant.”

Now, all this about young Laurence M‘Kim being Abbot of beautiful
Dulce Cor, and yet no whit a monk (save that he could sing like an
angel), may sound strange to ears accustomed to authority episcopal
and papal, to monasteries French and Italian. But in Galloway we
Douglases minded not the King of Scots at all, wet day or dry day, and
the pope only when we had need of him--generally to give us leave to
marry within the proscribed degrees, for the sake of the Douglas
properties, family tree, and such-like. At other times we of the
Southern House did much as we liked, in the Church as in the State,
our yea being yea, and our nay nay.

Now, the Douglases of the Red grew great, and are to this day great
and high, by reason of truckling and fawning on the king and the
Stewarts. But the Douglases of the Black--never! All except my Lord
James, that is, and he never could help trying to please all that came
his way, man and woman, gentle and simple. For he was ruddy as young
David, the shepherd boy that became a king; tall, too, like a god; and
my heart--went after him. Ah! but enough of this. The time to tell
these things is not yet. All the same, James was always at heart, as
in his person, a Douglas of the Red. For me, I am Black of the Black.

It was, of course, impossible that all the great train of honour and
of defence which William Douglas, my cousin, had given to the Abbot
Laurence to travel to Rome withal should find lodging within the walls
of the convent of St. Brigida. Indeed, as these (barring the
churchmen) were exclusively soldiers, and dashing blades most of them,
it was perhaps as well, or certain variations in the Rule of that most
excellent founder might have been introduced.

So it fell out exceedingly _à propos_. While the Bald Cat was
hesitating what she should do, hemming and hawing hither and thither,
trying to grant and not to grant at the same time, as was her
bald-cattish way, there appeared from the midst of the retinue a man
in an ample “pelicon,” or pelisse, longer than was then in vogue, but
with a rich under-garnishing of fur. This garment had a wide rolling
collar, all covered over with the Bloody Heart of the Douglases, and a
great “bar sinister” of threaded gold crossed the mantle from shoulder
to its deepest fold, as if it had been a heraldic shield hung upon an
altar.

The new-comer was a man of about fifty, quickly greying, and with a
mouth that pouted continually like that of a pettish, changeable
woman. His long hose were of silk, in what I afterwards found was the
height of the fashion at Paris--one leg and thigh being covered with
pale blush rose-colour and the other tucked out in clear greenish
white, like that which one sometimes sees behind a windy sunset, far
in the deeps of the sky.

The man was indeed a marvel to behold, and at the sight of him the
High Lady Superior ordered all her _pensionnaires_, especially the two
kittenish French girls, back to their cells. But in the circumstances,
of course, she was forced to permit me to remain. I should not have
obeyed in any case. I would have shaken the papal Bull in her face.

“My lady,” he said, “I am Paul Herault de Douglas, Sieur de Cheverney.
Permit me, Madame the Superior, to kiss your fair and devoted hand!”

The haughty expression which had distinguished the Mother Superior
swiftly gave place to another--one of almost fearful anticipation.

“Ah,” she said, “then you are our over-lord of Cour Cheverney, the
Seignior and civil protector of this blessed house of religion?”

“I fear I have but ill done my duty,” said the Sieur Paul, smiling and
pouting; “I have wasted my time, lingering so long in Paris, in the
train of the king, helping to drive out the English, and also employed
in other ways. I have somewhat neglected my property of
Cheverney--more especially in so far as concerns my duty to you, and
to this noble and beautiful establishment!”

And again he bowed and kissed the hand of the Lady Superior.

“A beautiful hand and one more fit for a king’s court than--!”

He stopped, and believe it who will (the sisters in the convent would
not!) the Bald Cat lifted her forefinger and waggled it at him, right
well pleased, smiling the while like a fox at a barnyard pullet.

“Ah, naughty,” she murmured coaxingly; “these are indeed the manners
of a court. But in Touraine we are accustomed to plainer things, are
we not, Sister Margaret?”

And she turned to me as she spoke. But I had suffered too much
already, and was in no mood to be gracious at the eleventh hour.

“Indeed,” said I, “I am no sister, either of yours or of the Order of
St. Bridget. Call in Sister Eulalie with her bread-and-water, if you
like--she will tell you. I am on my way to be married to the greatest
lord in all Scotland, and, besides, I am a princess in my own right!”

It was not, perhaps, very ladylike, though I have

[Illustration: AND AGAIN HE BOWED AND KISSED THE HAND OF THE LADY
SUPERIOR.]

heard worse things said by much greater and wiser people. But then no
more can bread-and-water for four days be called “ladylike.” If girls
of eighteen are to be treated like galley-knaves--God wot, somebody
has to pay for it in the end.

Yet I was no little ashamed when the Lady Superior took my ill-nature
with great quietude, passing it over as the mere naughtiness of a
child, as yet irresponsible--and so (I grant it) showing herself of
the better breeding.

Then the Sieur Paul, advancing the rose-blush leg out of his armorial
mantle (or, as we women say, pelisse), invited me to consider his
castle of Cour Cheverney my home till such time as I should be ready
to set out upon my journey to Scotland, there to wed with my Cousin
William--my Lord High Buckram-and-Iron, as I had already named him in
my heart.

Indeed, the phrase, which I thought happily invented, passed my lips
that very night after we had departed for Cour Cheverney. I was
speaking to Laurence at the time. But to my surprise and vexation he
rebuked me for it, saying that William of Avondale was worth all the
rest of the family put together--all, that is, who had been left on
the earth after the Black Dinner which Chancellor Crichton, the fox,
and Tutor Livingston, the Queen Mother’s fat spaniel, had given my
brothers William and David within the castle of Edinburgh.

And at this rebuke I shrugged my shoulders and pouted, like the spoilt
child I was at that time. God wot, I learned to behave better
afterwards.

“Well, since it must be--so must it be!” I said, sighing, “but (I say
it twice) I had rather have wedded with yourself, Larry!”

He turned on me, white this time, not red--yes, blue-white as the
little shadows that sunshine makes behind snow-wreaths. (Oh, I love to
see a man moved like that!)

“For God’s sake, girl, have ye no pity?” he cried, putting his hand to
his brow--a gesture which his father also had when perplexed--“if ye
say the like again, I will--I will--!”

“Ay, and what will ye do then?” said I, mocking his Galloway accent,
which showed itself whenever he was excited. “Will ye refuse me your
reverence’s blessing? Na, surely never! Or aiblins would ye smite a
poor lass, that never did ye harm, with the Greater Excommunication?”

Larry turned away without speaking, and that made me a little sorry.
But ah, the inward happiness to be among men again after two years!
Yet even then I did not know the power which had come to me during
these years, nor yet the good that all the greyhound fare of the
convent had done me. In a word, I was just beginning to learn what I
could do with the hearts of men.

And there is nothing like that to a woman! In her heart, carefully
covered over, maybe--to be dug for deep and long, but still
there--indisputable, unobtrusive, there is the same desire to every
one of womankind. Bah--they tell you different, some of them, but they
lie. To be beautiful and to turn men between their fingers this way
and that, as a potter doth a vessel, moulding it to his thought. That
is the Thing Desired of the Heart--the princesshood, the queen’s
sceptre. All else, as I, who have tried all, do know--housewifery,
maternity, charity, the life conventual, the chatter of a court, the
mistressing of a great house--are, as the folk say in Galloway, but a
“do-no-better”! And, indeed, among such men as I have known--Douglases
of the Black and of the Red, Stewarts with the bitter, murderous Bruce
blood in them--what better can a woman do?

Well, it is past for me now, and yet I can warm my heart at the fires
of the past--yea, to this very day I chew the pleasant cud of memory.
It was not all dust and ashes, as the priests say; it has not all
turned to apples of Sodom, and the taste is not as of bitter ashes in
my mouth. Still, even in old age, I judge that this is the second best
thing which can happen to a woman--that she should have been beautiful
in her youth, or, at least, by some quirk or trick of tongue or face
or manner, witching, and capable of making herself desired.

I say that is the _second_ best thing in a woman’s life. The absolute
best, the gold centre of all, is that during her love-time she should
have known one man good, and true, and great. Then only can she wholly
forget self in another, which is a woman’s heaven of heavens.




 CHAPTER III.
 COUR CHEVERNEY

So to Cour Cheverney we went, the fat-faced goodman with the pouting
lips and the unsteady Florentine eyes leading the way. The fields, how
fine they smelt--hawthorn, red and white, single-flower and
double-flower, on every tree! The hedgerows--as in the Galloway of my
childhood, there are hedgerows in Touraine--full of red pimpernel and
blue hyacinth, and with the yellow broom they named the kings after
peeping over everywhere, while stone-chats and other small birds went
swaying on the thin fishing-rod branches.

Ah, it was greatly good! Better still, to see the white convent walls
that had held me so long sink behind the tall trees, which shut in
also Sister Eulalie and her bread-and-water. To Cour Cheverney--yes,
we were going. At the risk of I know not what dread penalty, I had
looked across at the tall tower, a cliff of mason-work, higher than
Thrieve by a score of feet, though not so massive and square in shape,
from the perilous top of the gardener’s ladder.

Now I was to see it nearer at hand. The Abbot Laurence, in the pride
of his ambassadorial office, rode beside the Mother Superior, while
the Sieur Paul smiled over his shoulder at them both. It may be well
understood that I was on the other side of Laurence on my pony,
Varlet. Now Varlet was specially wicked and restive, because he had
been most insufficiently exercised by Monsieur the Almoner of the
Convent. For the Abbé Barré, our good father-confessor, was not a
little afraid of Varlet’s hoofs and teeth. But as for me, I had no
fear, and I specially wished to know all that Larry had to tell,
before we arrived at Cour Cheverney. For I did not know how we might
be lodged there, nor what chance there would be of my having speech
with my ancient playmate in that great place.

“Tell me first how all goes at home,” I bade him; “they have settled
you as abbot comfortably at Sweetheart Abbey--so much I know. None
shall vex you there. So at least I bade them, and so Cousin Will
promised!”

For I, too, could make myself great upon occasion.

“Oh, well enough,” he said, a little indifferently. Then, recollecting
who had given him his preferment, he added quickly, “And indeed I am
grateful, since no better may be. But the sword, and not the
psalm-book, was my proper calling.”

“Time was when you were of the contrary opinion,” I said; “tell
me--for once I will confess you--who is she?”

But he denied. There was nothing and no one.

“Nevertheless,” said he, “a man may sometimes lift his eyes and see
the moon!”

“Yes,” I retorted on him, fast as words can follow words, “true, but
only a baby will cry for it!”

“Then I am, I fear me, a gross pagan,” he said as swiftly, “for I
worship her!”

“That is bad,” I said, “and most inconsistent in a man who must spend
his life in swaddling and wet-nursing twoscore such sturdy Endymions
as the fathers of Dulce Cor. How do you manage it? The Slave of the
Lamp could not serve them all!”

“Oh, easily enough,” Laurence made answer. “I am (let us say) Abbot of
Sweetheart. So far, well--but again better, I might have been the
captain of a company, a soldier with men-at-arms under him, like
Sholto, my brother--Sir Sholto, if you please, with his little
regiment of five children! Still there remains to me the abbey of
Sweetheart. From chapel to refectory, from dormitory to pantler’s
cellarage, I conceive it as a barracks. The soldiers therein observe
the Order of Citeaux, and, indeed, not St. Bernard himself could be
firmer and stricter--in all, that is, which concerns the keeping of
that Rule by others. But for myself--well, there are monks who, as it
were, are eunuchs for the Kingdom’s sake. But for myself--no! I am
only one set in authority over monks. You complain of bread-and-water
at St. Brigida’s, but at Sweetheart, my dear lady, I can do more and
better, and no man raise his voice to pipe a ‘What dost thou?’”

I changed the subject, for the grey towers of Cour Cheverney grew
nearer apace.

“And what of William and James--and the lads? Are they at Thrieve?
Tell me!”

For I could not bring myself to speak of my Cousin William as Earl of
Douglas--at least not yet, still less as my husband!

Laurence gave a little hitch to his mule’s bridle. Of white leathern
thongs it was, curiously plaited. Then he bent over to the side away
from me, as if something there claimed his attention. Ever since his
arrival he had had these strange habits. I had not observed them in
him before; but perhaps that was because I was growing older, and so
noticed more. So I thought, at any rate.

Then Larry pointed to the soaring keep and the grey flanking towers of
the Cour Cheverney.[2]

“Yonder,” he said, with a little bitter smile which I understood not
then; “they are both yonder, my Lord William and my Lord James. Do you
think that a young wooer, hot upon his love-making, and the brother,
the friend of the bridegroom, he who is to stand by and see his joy,
will be far away when the bride is brought home?”

Then a sudden terror seized me.

“I will not be married like this, here and now,” I cried; “signed for,
taken from custody, guarded, delivered, and the note acquitted--I,
Margaret Douglas, that am Princess of Galloway, and but eighteen years
of age!”

And without a word more I set spurs in Varlet, and turned him about
towards the woods. The king was at Amboise--Charles, the King of
France, I mean. He would do me justice. He would make me a maid of
honour in his court. That would be easy. There was great need of such.
I had heard the Bald Cat say so more than once--Sister Eulalie too!

Then what a dance I led that cavalcade. I laugh now when I think of
it. Off his saddle Larry could have caught me easily, having the gift
of the fleet foot. Ay, I will wager if he had been in training, and in
his hose and jerkin, he could have winded even Varlet over a long
course. But, as it was, he sat there girning impotently on a
churchman’s mule. He was full of the good beef and wine of
Devorgilla’s abbey--though indeed neither showed in his profile, fine
as that of a graven statue. Worst of all, he was swathed in bandages
ecclesiastical, cope and soutane and mantle, or whatever these
half-men please to call them.

As for me, I made a good start, and went through the cavalcade like an
arrow from a bow.

Inwardly laughing, I could hear the din of pursuit thin out and grow
silent behind me, as I urged Varlet onward faster and always faster.
It is easy to get away from a lot of monks and a few knights and
esquires heavily clad in armour--that is, with a good horse between
one’s knees and a well-pointed spur of silver on either heel.

Amboise it was I was bound for--nothing less. I did not know the way
to Amboise very exactly, but I had heard that it lay away to the west,
down the valley, and someone had told me that by hard riding one could
reach it by nightfall. The king would be glad to see me--of that I
made no doubt. And in so much, at least, I made no mistake.

But as I galloped on my spirits rose at leaving Will of Avondale, my
cousin, behind, together with the hateful thought of being dragged
from a convent only to be married. I was not really dragged, but no
matter--that was the way I liked to think about it then.

And I thought also, that if I could only have gone back to play with
Larry about the braes of Boreland, crossing over in a boat from the
Thrieve when it pleased us, I should have been perfectly happy. I did
not want to be married, at least not so soon, and have done with
girlhood before I had ever tasted it, and--and--well, not to have my
own choosing of a husband, as Maud Lindsay had when she married
Sholto. Even if I could have had the pick of the Avondale brothers,
all set out in a row--William, James, Archibald, Hugh, and little
John--that would not have seemed so bad. At least, it would have been
fun to see them. Then I might not have run off like this. But to marry
a sober-sides like William Douglas, whom everyone (of the Douglas
faction) said was the best and wisest person in the world, and who
looked as if he stuffed himself with smithy filings, wore buckram next
his skin, and went to bed in complete armour with his head pillowed on
the family tree! _Ciel!_ How I gritted my teeth, set my heels into
Varlet, and longed for the towers of Amboise to rise above the dwarf
aspens and pollard poplars by the brook-sides, which seam all sweet
Touraine as the Garden of France slopes gently to the Loire--like some
gracious woman lying asleep, and smiling in a pleasant dream.

[Illustration: “I AM HAPPY, MOST HAPPY TO SERVE YOU, MOST NOBLE YOUNG
LADY!”]

But the valley, which at first had been but as a dimple on a smooth
fair skin, deepened into a lirk between two hills, narrowed into a
gorge, and then--in a moment I came upon the little river (called the
Cosson), which for a long distance runs a race with the Loire ere it
decides to join forces with it. Had I mounted the brae again and kept
the crown of the land, I had gotten easily enough to Amboise (though
the way was far), but in my ears I seemed to hear the shouting of the
enemy behind me--of my pursuers, I mean. And there, on the other hand,
was the water lying green and deep beneath me.

Howsomever I was on the point of riding Varlet at it on the chance
that he could swim (and, indeed, the feat itself is no great matter),
when all of a sudden there burst a young man out of some green bracken
and elderberry bushes by the bank of the river.

He was a tall, ruddy youth of weight and brawn, with eyes constantly
laughing, and as he advanced methought I caught a glimpse of something
white--the flutter of a neckerchief or a kilted petticoat belike--in
the thicket out of which he came.

He ran alongside Varlet for a step or two, calling names to him
(speaking all the while like one who has a way with horses and women).
Then with a short, sharp grasp at the bridle, he brought him up all
panting upon the very brink of the river.

Then the splendid young man took off his bonnet, which was of blue,
light and clear, and had a white band and tassel. A white plume of
some foreign bird was set in the side.

“I am happy, most happy to serve you, most noble young lady!” he said
in French that was a little tashed with disuse, yet which had
obviously proved sufficient for its owner’s purposes, as witness that
flutter of jupe among the bracken. But as for me, I answered him in
Scots. For I knew him at the first glint. They do not breed such
acreages of flesh and bone, nor yet cover them with such milk-white
skin, in the land of France.

“Jamie lad, my guid cozin,” I cried, “gang back an’ finish oot your
half-cut rig! Or ye will keep a grudge again’ puir wee Marget a’ the
days o’ your life!”

He stood still, fastened with embarrassment, and then threw up his
hands with a long whistle.

“The Fair Maid o’ Galloway!” he said, as if stiff-stricken. “Certes,
lass, but ye are grown indeed--and bonny as the day. Gie your kinsman
a kiss for stopping that reckless galloper o’ yours at the peril o’
his neck!”

But though at another time--well--I had been glad enough to kiss Larry
(and he not my cousin, but a plain blacksmith’s son), I refused him.

“Na, na, Jamie Douglas,” I cried daffingly. “Gang back yonder where ye
cam frae. Ye will conquest mair than the braw French tongue, I am
thinkin’! Fish and cranes and wild fowl bide in the marshes, I hae
heard, and I ken ye were aye a braw sportsman. But as for the cozinly
kiss--let me gie ye ae advice. And that is: Never ye mix the white
wine and the black, lad! They gang na weel thegither, Jamie, my coz!”

And with that I turned and left him, standing “finger in his mouth,”
as we say in Scotland. I even heard him mutter, “The besom! Hath she
learned the like o’ that in a convent of nuns?”

Then because James never wasted anything (his one virtue!) I judge
that he took my advice. For he went slowly back towards the thicket
whence he had come, with his head bent meditatively to the ground.

But ere he went out of sight, I stood up in my stirrups and called out
to him, “Tell me, cozin, where left you William?”

“What William?” said he, growling rather than speaking over his
shoulder.

“Why,” cried I, “since when was there more than one William--Will
Douglas, that was once Will of Avondale, and--my affianced husband?”

I fancy I made him wince at that, even as Larry had done. And I meant
to. I always knew which men of those who came near me--that is, three
out of four--would not like to hear of my marrying anyone else. And
so, in spite of flags of truce fluttering from among elder thickets, I
knew very well it was with James.

“How should I ken where he bides,” he growled. “I have not a string
tied to our Will’s tail!”

“No, nor to your own!” I called back to him; “you rake the country
overmuch, James!”

In which I had him at a vantage, for he answered me no more, seeming
(as we say both in Scots and French) sore “fashed” with me for my free
handling of his peccadilloes.

But I turned my horse’s head, and would have ridden after him.

“Where is Will?” I cried. “Tell me--or”--

I pointed with my hand to the boskage, turning at the same time my
horse’s head.

“You are a shameless little vixen,” he cried (I am not sure that he
did not say “villain”). “I know not where Will is--he is not at Cour
Cheverney, but where he may be found, by St. Brice, I know not--making
himself musty over parchments, and chilling of his blood by drinking
cold well-water, I warrant him.”

“Ah, James,” I answered him, as I turned away to meet Larry, who,
meantime, was in a perfect fume of anger, and the Sieur Paul, wholly
out of breath, “I am not sure that elderberry wine, taken in quantity
and by the wayside, is so muckle better for the health. It sours upon
the stomach, my good Cozin James!”




 CHAPTER IV.
 A GOOD FIGHT

Now, ever since I could run alone I have always tried to find out
everything for myself, and to put my spoon into every dish the like of
which I had never seen before. So, having easily passed off my
escapade upon the friskiness of Varlet, and his having had no exercise
for weeks at the convent, only Larry, who did not matter at all,
understanding, I was resolved to make the most of our stay at Cour
Cheverney.

I had seen greater things before, of course; for mine own home of
Castle Thrieve yields to none in all the kingdoms where I have been,
and I could recall, though dimly, those great days when my dear
brother William held his tourney on the mead of Glenlochar, the one
that lasted three days--ah, there never was aught finer than that in
France--no, nor yet in Italy.

But then, at that time I was a little girl, scarce fit to hold the
train of the Queen of Beauty, and Maud Lindsay it was who had all the
honours and all the eye-glancings of the younger men. But now that has
changed, and I felt for the first time, I know not how, that I could
hold my own with a king’s daughter.

Moreover, Cour Cheverney was still empty of my bridegroom. That was
its chief joy. I had an unexpected respite. As Margaret of Galloway I
could laugh at Will of Avondale, my cousin, at his books and
parchments, the great schemes in his head, and the little outcome
there had been of them; but as my bridegroom, my husband, my master,
the Earl of Douglas, the Duke of Touraine, I was not so sure that
Cousin Will would be such a laughing matter.

So, for the present, Cour Cheverney, even with the presence of the
Lady Superior, was to me highly desirable; a means of furthering my
education, and, by incident, that of several other people as well.

And my chief joy and safety, in thus completing of my education, was
that everyone knew that I was so soon to be married--by high
pontifical dispensation, papal Bull, holy cord, and four pounds of wax
thereto attached--not to speak, as it were, of bell, book, and candle.
So they might sigh, the men of them, that is--but no one could think
(no, not for a moment) that I meant any harm. Indeed, I never did, and
said so frequently when the harm came.

Now Cour Cheverney was of itself a pleasant place. The Sieur Paul, a
rich man, had recently had it put in repair. The chambers he had
decorated with tapestry from Paris. The higher windows were widened,
and balconies thrust out from the thickness of the wall. The courtyard
was set about with a bordering of flowers. Bravest of all was a great
Judas tree, with purple blossoms close set upon its branches, which
cast a shade along the left side of the court, opposite to the great
hall and the men’s apartments. I asked the Sieur Paul to have a bench
put there, and I went often to that place of a sunny afternoon with my
broidery--to be quiet and think.

But the strange thing was that I scarcely got five minutes of
meditation, and as for the solitude which I had come there to
seek--why, first came one and then another, my faith, past believing!
The place was like a fair.

There was Laurence, who, being a prelate, or, at least, having the
powers of one, could not go a-hunting. Yet, because I said once, to
try him, that he was of no more use than to bide at home with the
maids, he took to fishing, and made infinite work with his tackle,
sitting beside me on that same seat. I never heard whether he landed
anything--from the river, I mean. At the seat he certainly did not. So
I mourned with him over his ill success, and when James Douglas came
down in yet another new purple vest, with gold buttons and long
sleeves of silk, I told him of the little progress that Larry was
making in the art of fishing with the angle, innocently inquiring if
he did not think that with a rod of elder and a busking of white
jupon, our fisherman might try the banks of the Closson with better
success.

“These French troutlets are shy. They have been tried so often
before,” I said. “You can ask my Lord James as to the bait he is wont
to use!”

Then Larry, knowing that James and I had some secret between us, would
grow all of a sulk, and, bundling his things together, take leave of
us upon the instant. At which James, making a little face behind his
back, would sit down beside me, while the Sieur Paul went
a-promenading along the other side of the court with the Bald Cat upon
his arm. She had discovered that on the maternal side he could claim
to be a cousin ten times removed (if not more) of her family. And as
he was also kin to the great, and possessed a castle like Cour
Cheverney, the wise Mother Superior had no objections to the alliance,
in spite of the “bar sinister” which, like an oriflamme, he flaunted
athwart his back.

It was one of the most frequent of our ploys to dance in the courtyard
of an evening. James could not dance well. He was too big of bone, and
too fair. Only dark men dance well. But he would snatch angrily at the
strings of his doublet and kick at the house dogs as they slunk
uneasily along the selvage of the flagged square, apprehensive of so
many heels all going to a measure. Then he would affirm loudly that,
thank Heaven, only fools and cropped poodles could dance; that as for
himself, the “deil might care, but he, James Douglas, cared no jot!”

All which was, as one might say, meat to the hungry. And specially to
me, who had been two long years in a convent, with Sister Eulalie
tugging all the time at the tail of one’s gown! Well, I have heard
speak a great deal of paradise. And it may all be true. But at
eighteen one does not hunger after such doubtful exchanges. Cour
Cheverney and the dance beneath the Judas tree were good enough for
me.

Then Larry, who had a vast amount of music in his fingers as well as
in his toes, and could play any instrument from an organ to a
five-stringed _guiterne_ or a mouth flute--by sheer wit, as it were,
and without learning, used to play for us. At first it was all
solemn-sounding tunes on the great harp--after which, perhaps, low,
sweet harmonies on the _psalterion_. Then, as he warmed to his work,
I, who knew him and saw the ichor mounting, would hand him a viol
silently and hush the company with my hand. For, if left alone, they
were bound to hear a marvellous thing.

Then would he sing, accompanying himself, like the carolling lark on
the first day of May, in such a voice as never was heard save in the
sky, till he would bring the very tears to our eyes, and set us to the
sobbing for no reason at all. Songs of lost love he would sing, of
desolate low shores and maids yet more desolate. Sadder and sadder the
ballad would grow, till, with a sudden fling of the elbow through his
embroidered robe, Larry would dash into some mirthful lilt of old
Scottish song, all marriage-making and happiness, with white-mutched
crones nodding heads at their gossip, and goodmen chaffering in the
market-place.

As he played he grew fixed and lost, this daft Larry of ours, whom
fate and the Douglases had made an abbot, and the ambassador of
another man’s wooing. And though there was a shaven patch, the size of
a clipped ducat, on his crown, I wot well the curls clustered so fair
and maidenly about his brow, that, had he not worn breeches (or
whatever holy men wear underneath their soutanes), the Bald Cat would
have had them shorn by the roots in the twinkling of an eye.

Then, of course, at Cour Cheverney there were other exploits. Great
brawny James was all for the tourneying, and (also of course) at that,
among the country lords and Knights-of-the-Green-Fields, easily bore
the gree. But Bevis Roland, the renegade Englishman, as easily beat
him at the archery, which at least was exceedingly good for our brisk
Jamie’s soul. But again at riding and hunting, and also at the
horse-leaping, my Lord James Douglas could give a long start to all
the company--an it were not Larry, who, being a clerk on a white mule,
a cross on his breast, and a mitre on his head, could not, for very
shame, compete with him. But he stood behind me, gritting his teeth
and groaning in his spirit.

“I could beat him,” he said, “’fore the Lord, I could beat him at all
but the jousting. And as for that bag-swagging Englisher, Bevis
Roland, I could shoot three in the white to his one, for sixty golden
crowns! If I could not, may the devil change me into a kailstock. Yet
here I must stand like a draff-sack set upright. God rest my soul for
it in the day of need! It is much to put up with for the sake of
religion!”

Then, the devil he had imprecated entering into me, I encouraged him
to cast his robe, his cope, and soutane, and to it in his hose and
shirt. And by my fey, the mad wight would have done it in a twinkling.
He had the heavy mantle half off his shoulder, when suddenly he caught
sight of the great golden cross upon it, all wrought in thread as
thick as wire.

Then some thought of his calling, as I hope, or shame of the people
about him--as I fear--caused Larry to halt, and with a sigh he drew
his cope again about him. But when I had egged him on a little further
(the devil or one of his imps still possessing me), he turned upon me
and said in Scots, “Mistress Meg, art a naughty wench! And if thou
dost not mend thy manners, wilt come to no good! I ken what means thy
trokings under the Judas tree yonder, thy blotched broiderings and
sudden eye-liftings, thy seats set in the shade of an afternoon”--

“Concerning which, good lad,” I retorted, “you, holy Father Larry, of
a certainty ought to know, for you sit there more than any! Ay, and
hold thread for the winding, too, between these same thrice-blessed
abbatical fingers! _Pax vobiscum! Retro me! Requiescat in pace!_”

And that being all my stock of Latin, I made to bless him backwards in
sport, which angered him curiously.

“Ah, that I were your father,” he murmured, low and bitter in mine
ear, “or your mother, ay--or even the Abbess of St. Brigida two days
agone! There are some rules of that Order which would suit you!”

“Well, what would happen then, most reverend prior of the bare chin?”
I demanded.

Larry said nothing in words, but his fingers itched visibly to box my
ears--or, for aught I know, more and worse.

But in the midst of these occupations and the new joyance of freedom
which had come to me, the Sieur Paul promised other entertainment. He
was, I think, some little piqued that our big James had so easily
borne his point against the gentlemen of Touraine. So said he one
morning, when we were all at gossip under the Judas tree, “Messire
James, my good lord, there are none of your mettle here, but over
yonder at Loches with the Dauphin there are one or two knights of
another web--La Hire and the younger Dunois--good lances and stout
hearts. How will you like it if I send for them, make a fête day at
Cour Cheverney, and see if you can break a lance with them as deftly
as with us poor laggard oafs of the provinces?”

“Faith, I would like it greatly,” said James. “I ask no better!”

And to me, turning his head, he said in Scots, “Cousin Marget, ye will
see me whammle them!” Which is the same as to say that he would make
them all bite the dust.

For that was our James, root and branch of him--ready, self-confident,
never blate, everyway large, hectoring, easy of manner, quick as a
touch to draw on a gentleman, swinge a burgher, or drink pewter for
pewter with a beggar. He never dreamed that he could fail in anything.
Nor for that matter (to tell the truth) did I!

Well, they came. And I sat on a fine crimson-draped balcony which had
been fastened out on struts from two lower windows of the keep. For
(having none other) the Sieur Paul had perforce to make me Queen of
Beauty; and as for James, he thought, as usual, that he had naught
else to do but lift the jewel--a black diamond circled all about with
points of brilliants and sapphires--which certainly would have become
me excellently. So I hoped he would win.

The company arrived. There were knights on splendid horses, the like
of which I have never seen in Scotland, except the noble black, which
had belonged to William, my dear young brother, who was so
treacherously slain at Edinburgh by Chancellor Livingston and the
sneaking gutter-hound Crichton.

There was Dunois the younger, a tall, dark man, quiet and lissom, a
velvety glitter in the eyes of him like a wandering Egyptian, with La
Hire, a smart, grey-headed man of fifty, stout-backed, and with a long
upper lip, also with little to say for himself. To them add the Count
des Baux and Henri de Cayades, light, alert men of the South,
Provençal through all their veins, both born within sight of the
castle of good Roi Réné, and both as full of talk and apt to love as
a willow bole is of sap in the springtime.